this is actually our last show of the
season for our main story we thought
we'd pull back a little bit and look at
one of the biggest questions that has
defined this year how good was a star is
born star was born over the weekend a
great movie and it was amazing it was
amazing it's still on my heart
Bradley Cooper had ahold of my soul
there for a little while it's uh it it
is beyond great maybe it's time let the
old ways
Bradley Cooper oh my gosh go see the
movie go see it yeah that guy loves him
and he's distinctive for the Dallas
Cowboys
no one doesn't like a star is born it's
the one movie that even Neil deGrasse
Tyson can't ruin John I had a small
issue with the film see if you want to
know how a star is actually born you
start with a gas cloud shut up shut up
you shut up Neil deGrasse Tyson let this
be the one thing about Stassi don't
ruined
unfortunately we're not talking about a
star is born tonight in fact we're going
to talk about the exact opposite of that
movie the troubling rise of
authoritarian leaders around the world a
lot of them there are the ones that you
instinctively think about like your
bladder Mir Putin and Xi Jingping who've
been steadily consolidating their power
there's the re-election of strong men
like Hungary's Viktor Orban and turkeys
worship Diwan and then there's what
happened just last month in the world's
fifth largest country Brazil has a new
president becoming a latest nation to
elect a far-right leader extreme right
populist bolson era has exalted the
country's military dictatorship
advocated torture and threatened to
destroy jail or drive his political
opponents into exile is calling for
unity oh that's nice he's calling for
unity is he yet the problem is he
expressed an affection for torture and
dictatorship before that and political
platforms are a bit like tinder profiles
once you advocate torture it doesn't
really matter what else you say it's all
the people are gonna remember and for
good reason and not what what well no to
authoritarian leaders are the same the
global trend toward them is alarming
especially because in many cases people
are actively choosing them a report
recently concluded that one-third of the
world's population lives in a
backsliding democracy and that is why
there's a pretty good chance that you
may have been watching the news at some
point this year and found yourself
saying what the is happening to the
world and why so tonight let's look at
three common traits that authoritarian
leaders tend to have to try and figure
out what can make them so appealing to
people and to what extent this country
is in danger of heading in the same
direction and the first trait is
projecting strength authoritarians tend
to love grand displays of force like the
military parades featuring weaponry that
you've seen places like China North
Korea Venezuela and Russia where they'll
even sometimes throw in a surprise
musical number
[Music]
yeah what a warning there Russia
that's what musicals are like when you
don't allow gay people tell you that
spectacles like those serve a purpose as
many authoritarians project strength out
of a real concern that they may be seen
as illegitimate in kind of the same way
that a man who is insecure about his
penis buys a motorcycle or takes up
bodybuilding or invents the Tesla how
how weird is your penis even how weird
is it but projecting military strength
often isn't enough men you
authoritarians tend to conflate their
country's national identity with their
personal identity so they individually
need to appear strong to that most
obvious example of this is Vladimir
Putin who's taken so many glamor shots
there are calendars of him that the
latest ones feature him
cuddling leopards taking a shirtless ice
bath and sunbathing which cool but but
but he's not alone there's also Chechen
leader Ramzan Kadyrov's ridiculous
workout videos which I frankly cannot
recommend highly enough it's like
watching a Keebler Elf get ripped
although my favorite example of this is
also actually the saddest just watch as
the authoritarian president of
Turkmenistan forces his cabinet to watch
him take a gold bar and do whatever this
is
Wow when you go to work tomorrow and
you're forced to laugh at your
supervisors dumb jokes just spare a
thought for the people who had to give a
standing ovation to their boss for
lifting a golden curtain right so so
authoritarians are obsessed with
projecting strength and I often tell
their citizens that that strength is
necessary to protect them from what well
that actually brings us to their second
major trait a tendency to demonize
enemies authoritarians often go out of
their way to identify and sometimes
manufacture a group of evildoers from
whom they and they alone can save the
country in the Philippines Rodrigo
Duterte rose to power by claiming he was
the antidote to drug crime since 2016
Human Rights Watch estimates that his
drug war has killed more than 12,000
people many of them extrajudicially and
that shouldn't really be entirely
surprising given that this was an actual
message that his campaign issued at
Christmas alone in your acquittal lemon
verbena buddy Cooper in Merry Christmas
crema de Rugy star Bogdanov oh crap
criminal at the UNEP a pair of so
pilipino Hawaiian young metal at pitoni
para el corazon eaten a hole in you
Merry Christmas oh boy that is a hard
turn in a Christmas message although it
actually does remind me with
Thanksgiving coming up this week you
know I just like to take a moment to
wish a Happy Thanksgiving to everyone
watching this tonight especially if
you're a turkey because we're going to
slit your throat stuck your dumb bird
corpse with Brad's chopped vegetables
garlic and rosemary and then bake you in
an oven for four hours it's what you
deserve this will be your final
Happy Thanksgiving
sorry where was I oh that's right
authoritarian Sneed enemies because one
of their greatest appeals is making a
complicated world simple if you're under
attack or you've been made to feel that
way it is nice to have a charismatic
individual say the rules the
system I've got this
that's an impulse that we're all
vulnerable to take me I believe in the
separation of powers and the rule of law
but if America were to descend into a
Civil War and someone said hey what if
we just let Tom Hanks figure it out a
not insignificant part of me would go
yeah that seems nice in fact all praise
Daddy Hanks long live the Gump of death
to his enemies when people are
frightened they can be more susceptible
to authoritarians that is why if a real
threat doesn't present itself strong men
will sometimes make one up often
targeting a group that's persecuted to
begin with like immigrants or minorities
Viktor orbn's right would turn in
hungary has been accompanied by stoking
fear of Muslims and refugees and when
Putin was facing a dip in popularity a
few years ago he went after gay people
suggesting that homosexuality was a
weapon of the EU to weaken Russia which
yes sounds ridiculous but judging by
this man the message may have gone
across Russia is not Europe we have our
own conservative traditional values at
the moment in Europe these boundaries
are being crossed because they're
legalizing pedophilia they're legalizing
zoophilia they have zoo brothels wait
are you sure about that
he's I'm pretty confident that there is
no such thing as a zoo brothel a zoo
brothel is if anything just a regular
zoo where you can split the zookeeper 20
bucks to leave you alone in the penguin
area and you would hope don't think
about that if you don't like it just
don't absorb it just don't absorb the
idea in your mind and you would hope
that an independent press or an
opposition party might push back on that
sort of which actually brings
us to our final key trait which is
dismantling institutions because as they
gain power or ferret Aryans will try to
weaken any check on them journalists in
authoritarian regimes are frequently
threatened in
and killed or in putin's russia have
tragic accidents that hopefully others
may learn from an authoritarian will
also attack even more foundational
checks and balances like courts and
legislatures in recent years the
structures of government in Turkey China
Hungary and Venezuela have all been
modified to consolidate power under
their leaders and as Poland becomes
increasingly authoritarian their de
facto leader no longer has to worry
about the country's highest judge or
indeed many other judges because he his
party cleverly managed to force them out
simply by lowering their retirement age
and when some judges showed up to work
anyway in protest a government official
had this patronizing response they can
enter the building they can be their
vacant they can be there as guests but
they cannot work as judges because they
are retired I really don't blame those
judges for being furious about that
because as we all now know there are
only two ways to really piss off a judge
one force them into retirement or to ask
how many brews they'd usually pound when
working out with Vijay and squeeze they
don't like that at all so so look
projecting strange demonizing enemies
and dismantling institutions are very
broadly some key things that
authoritarians do and if you're
wondering who would ever want a leader
who does that the answer is lots of
people many people support Tudor Tate
not despite his authoritarian tendencies
but because of them
the way Filipinos have become too
disorderly and comfortable I think we
need a president that can implement
measures and discipline us it's so
obvious that the media is biased because
they only show the killings why don't
they show the other stuff he's doing
like all the infrastructure he's
building wait what
anything credible to hear someone click
brushing off killings and complaining
that more attention to be paid to
infrastructure she must be the only
person in the world who could hear a
story about a government death squad
throwing someone off a bridge you say
wait tell me more about that bridge
sturdy enough for a whole squad you say
very impressive as we've gone through
each of these traits you may have found
yourself thinking uh-oh some of these
are ringing a bell so unfortunately we
do now have to bring the story back
around to this guy our current president
because he definitely exhibits many of
the things that you've seen so far
tonight
he loves appearing strong he actually
wanted a military parade and when it
comes to demonizing enemies
he's gleefully gone after immigrants and
other marginalized groups as well as
picking aggressively optional battles
with Canada the NFL Mark Cuban the FBI
Robert DeNiro
the 2017 Emmy Awards Puerto Rico the
postal service an upscale farm-to-table
restaurant in Lexington Virginia the NSA
levar ball the city of Chicago the Mayor
of London the CEO of Merck Nordstrom and
Chrissy Teigen and that is only
counting the Twitter feuds and Trump has
openly expressed admiration for many of
the authoritarians you've seen including
specifically praising Tudor tea for the
unbelievable job he was doing cleaning
up crime in the Philippines Trump even
once retweeted a parody account that is
attributed to him the quote it is better
to live one day as a lion than a hundred
years as a sheep which isn't actually
something that Trump said it's a slogan
Mussolini used that's right it was
synonymous with pasture Hitler and and
when that was pointed out to Trump this
was his response did you know it was
Rosellini it's okay to know it's Bruce
Elaine yeah look Mussolini was Mussolini
it's okay
it's a very good quote it's a very
interesting quote and I know it I saw it
I saw what I know who said it but what
difference does it make whether it's
Mussolini is somebody else and so
certainly a very interesting quote you
want to be associated with a fascist no
I want to be associated with interesting
quotes okay okay so first let's agree
there's roughly 50% chance that Donald
Trump thinks that Mussolini is just an
Italian moose it's a coin flip and
second if being associated with
interesting quotes is the goal there are
better ones many of them attributing to
people who have committed far fewer war
crimes how about this one another thing
I like to do is give my vagina a little
vitamin D Trump didn't say that shailene
woodley did but it's a very interesting
quote and what I think we should
associate Trump with and it's worth
noting that was from before he was
elected president his entire tone on the
campaign trail was of an unapologetic
strong man I'm gonna bomb the out
of them I don't care like to punch him
in the face I'll tell you Gitmo we're
keeping that open now we're gonna load
it up with bad dudes we're gonna load it
up with a lot of bad dudes what your
works okay folks don't you know I have
these guys torture doesn't work believe
me it works okay Wow so bomb punch
imprison torture we just need to see
Trump lift a gold bar and do a topless
calendar shoot and we basically got
authoritarian bingo right there and the
thing is people liked that in fact it
may be the thing about Trump they liked
the most
watch how his supporters responded when
he described how Putin deals with
journalists and then they said you know
he's killed reporters and I don't like
that I'm totally against that I by the
way I hate some of these people but I'd
never kill him I hate him no I think no
these people honestly I'll be honest
I'll be honest I would never kill them
I would never do that ah that's safe no
I wouldn't I would never kill him but I
do hate him and I some of them are such
lying disgusting people it's true now
that is legitimately scary because I
know that Trump is kidding there but I'm
not sure that everyone in that audience
is and they are flirting with something
very dangerous because Trump will do
anything if it gets a big enough cheer
the difference between joking about
something and actually doing it is only
about 30 decibels on the
applause-o-meter so so the real worry
here isn't just that Trump sounds like
an authoritarian it's that many people
in this country like the way that sounds
we need somebody's tough Trump just
shows toughness and I love that it's
finally got some busting balls I'm gonna
feel safer in our country with him as a
president let me tell you if Jesus
Christ gets down off the cross and told
me Trump is with Russia I will tell him
hold on a second I need a check with the
president if it's true I honestly don't
know what's more depressing there the
thought of that man believe in it Trump
over Jesus all the thought of Jesus
coming back as someone who won't shut up
about Trump and Russia Jesus we get it
yet we all agree with you but you know
we get it no no I didn't see Maddow
Jesus was she on fire
so it's pretty clear by this point the
Trump shares many characteristics with
authoritarian leaders and yet we're not
currently an authoritarian state so why
is that well thankfully while Trump has
done terrible things as president our
institutions generally speaking so far
have been just strong enough to hold up
against his most authoritarian instincts
he's not managed to shut down the Muller
investigation yet he apparently wants to
end birthright citizenship but that's
not something a president can do and
just this week his efforts to ban a CNN
reporter from the White House were
halted by a judge that he himself had
appointed and that's good but there's no
doubt Trump is testing the system
appointing this well-dressed fire
hydrant as his acting Attorney General
is a worrying sign as are his repeated
attempts to delegitimize elections by
declaring results that he doesn't like
fraudulence so people do need to remain
vigilant and that is the key thing here
because while we may talk about
institutions being strong what that
actually means is that people are
working very hard to protect them and to
use them to contain this president's
worst impulses he's lost in court
because people have sued him he's kept
the Russian investigation going because
his advisors know there would be a
public outcry if he stopped it and to
the extent that Congress is able to
check him going forward it's because
people turned up at the midterms to keep
doing those things because the world is
dabbling with something very dangerous
right now
and America needs to be careful and look
I know democracy can be often by design
frustrating checks and balances can be
irritating and slow and might not
deliver the outcome that you wanted but
removing them opens the door to
something much worse and that is true
whether you live in Russia Turkey
Hungary the Philippines Brazil or yes
the United States and I know that
America is a different country with a
different history and thankfully more
resilient institutions but that is no
cause for complacency because the truth
is the honest answer to could
authoritarianism happen here is and
possibly always will be no I think no
[Music]
probably know
you